PEP 777: How to Re-invent the Wheel (#4036)
python/peps: peps/pep-0777.rst

PEP: 777

> Title: Re-inventing the Wheel

Reviewer: "How to re-invent the wheel" might be a better title, as this PEP does not actually re-invent the wheel; it just makes it possible for a companion PEP to do the re-inventing. (However, feel free to ignore this suggestion.)

Author: Good point, I like your suggestion.

Author: Ethan Smith <ethan@ethanhs.me>
Sponsor: Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>
PEP-Delegate: Paul Moore <p.f.moore@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 09-Oct-2024
Post-History:

Abstract
========

The current :pep:`wheel 1.0 specification <427>` was written over a decade ago,
and has been extremely robust to changes in the Python packaging ecosystem.
Previous efforts to improve the wheel specification 
:pep:`were deferred <491#pep-deferral>` to focus on other packaging
specifications. Meanwhile, the use of wheels has changed dramatically in the
last decade. There have been many requests for new wheel features over the

> years, however a fundamental obstacle to evolving the wheel specification has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
years; however, a fundamental obstacle to evolving the wheel specification has
```

been that there is no defined process for how to handle adding
backwards-incompatible features to wheels. Therefore, to enable other PEPs to

> describe new enhancements to the wheel specification, this PEP prescribes
> compatibility requirements on future wheel revisions. This PEP does *not*

Reviewer 2: Consider bolding this portion of the sentence to give the reader an "at-a-glance" perspective of the PEP.

```suggestion
describe new enhancements to the wheel specification, **this PEP prescribes**
**compatibility requirements on future wheel revisions**. This PEP does *not*
```

specify a new wheel revision. The specification of a new wheel format
(“Wheel 2.0”) is left to a future PEP.

Rationale
=========

> Currently, any change to the wheel specification that requires new behavior of
> installers is backwards incompatible and requires a major version increase in
> the wheel metadata format. An increase of the wheel major version has yet to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, wheel specification changes that require new installer behavior are backwards incompatible and require a major version increase in
the wheel metadata format. An increase of the wheel major version has yet to
```

happen, partially because such a change has the potential to be
catastrophically disruptive. Per
`the wheel specification <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/#installing-a-wheel-distribution-1-0-py32-none-any-whl>`_,
any installer that does not support the new major version must abort at install
time. This means that if the major version were to be incremented without
further planning, many users would see installation failures as older installers reject new wheels
uploaded to public package indices like the Python Package Index (PyPI). It is
critically important to carefully plan the interactions between build tools,
package indices, and package installers to avoid incompatibility issues,
especially considering the long tail of users who are slow to update their
installers.

> The aforementioned compatibility concerns have prevented valuable improvements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The backward compatibility concerns have prevented valuable improvements
```

to the wheel file format, such as
`better compression <https://discuss.python.org/t/improving-wheel-compression-by-nesting-data-as-a-second-zip/1747>`_,
`wheel data format improvements <https://discuss.python.org/t/should-there-be-a-new-standard-for-installing-arbitrary-data-files/7853/7>`_,
`better information about what is included in a wheel <https://discuss.python.org/t/record-the-top-level-names-of-a-wheel-in-metadata/29494>`_,
and `JSON formatted metadata in the ".dist-info" folder <https://discuss.python.org/t/is-was-there-a-goal-with-pep-566s-json-encoding-section/12324/3>`_.

> This PEP describes constraints and behavior for new wheel revisions to preserve
> stability for existing tooling that does not support a new wheel major version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This PEP describes constraints and behavior for new wheel revisions, and guides how to preserve
stability for existing tools that do not support a new major version of the wheel.
```

This ensures that backwards incompatible changes to the wheel specification
will only affect users and tools that are properly set up to use the newer
wheels. With a clear path for evolving the wheel specification, future PEPs
will be able to improve the wheel format without needing to re-define a
completely new compatibility story.

Specification
=============

Add Wheel-Version Metadata Field to Core Metadata
-------------------------------------------------

Currently, the :pep:`wheel 1.0 PEP <427>`, PEP 427, specifies that wheel files
must contain a ``WHEEL`` metadata file that contains the version of the wheel
specification that the file conforms to. PEP 427 stipulates that installers
MUST warn on installation of a wheel with a minor version greater than supported,

> and abort on installation of wheels with a major version that is greater than

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and MUST abort on installation of wheels with a major version that is greater than
```

what the installer supports. This ensures that users do not get invalid
installations from wheels that installers cannot properly install.

However, resolvers do not currently exclude wheels with an incompatible wheel
version. There is also currently no way for a resolver to check a wheel's
version without downloading the wheel directly. To make wheel version filtering
easy for resolvers, the wheel version **MUST** be included in the relevant
metadata file (currently METADATA). This will allow resolvers to efficiently
check the wheel version using the :pep:`658` metadata API without needing to
download and inspect the ``.dist-info/WHEEL`` file.

To accomplish this, a new core metadata field is introduced called

> ``Wheel-Version``. While this entry is optional for metadata included in a
> wheel of major version 1, it is mandatory for metadata in wheels of major
> version 2 or higher. This enforces that future revisions of the wheel

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``Wheel-Version``. While this field is optional for metadata included in a
wheel of major version 1, it is a mandatory field for metadata in wheels of major
version 2 or higher. This enforces that future revisions of the wheel
```

specification can rely on resolvers skipping incompatible wheels by checking
the ``Wheel-Version`` field.

> The ``Wheel-Version`` metadata field shall contain the exact same entry as the
> ``Wheel-Version`` entry in the ``WHEEL`` file, or any future replacement file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``Wheel-Version`` field in the metadata file shall contain the exact same entry as the
``Wheel-Version`` entry in the ``WHEEL`` file, or any future replacement file
```

Resolver Behavior Regarding ``Wheel-Version``
---------------------------------------------

Resolvers, in the process of selecting a wheel to install, **MUST** check a
candidate wheel's ``Wheel-Version``, and ignore incompatible wheel files.
Without ignoring these files, older installers might select a wheel that uses
an unsupported wheel version for that installer, and force the installer to
abort per :pep:`427`. By skipping incompatible wheel files, users will not see
installation errors when a project adopts a new wheel major version. As already
specified in PEP 427, installers **MUST** abort if a user tries to directly
install a wheel that is incompatible. If, in the process of resolving packages
found in multiple indices, a resolver comes across two wheels of the same
distribution and version, resolvers should prioritize the wheel of the highest
compatible version.

While the above protects users from unexpected breakages, users may miss a new
release of a distribution if their installer does not support the wheel version
used in the release. Imagine in the future that a package publishes 3.0 wheel
files. Downstream users won't see that there is a new release available if

> their installers only support 2.x wheels. Therefore, installers **SHOULD** emit
> a warning if, in the process of resolving packages, they come across a wheel
> and skip it for being incompatible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
their installers only support 2.x wheels. Therefore, installers **SHOULD** emit
a warning if, in the process of resolving packages, they come across an incompatible wheel
and skip it.
```

First Major Version Bump Must Change File Extension
---------------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, existing resolvers do not check the compatibility of wheels
before selecting them as installation candidates. Until a majority of users
update to installers that properly check for wheel compatibility, it is unsafe
to allow publishing wheels of a new major version that existing resolvers might
select. It could take upwards of four years before the majority of users are on
updated resolvers, based on current data about PyPI installer usage (See the
:ref:`777-pypi-download-analysis`, for
details). To allow for experimentation and faster adoption of 2.0 wheels,
this PEP proposes a one time change to the file extension of the
wheel file format, from ``.whl`` to ``.whlx``. This resolves the initial
transition issue of 2.0 wheels breaking users on existing installers that do
not implement ``Wheel-Version`` checks. By using a different file extension,
2.0 wheels can immediately be uploaded to PyPI, and users will be able to
experiment with the new features right away. Users on older installers will
simply ignore these new files.

> One rejected alternative would be to keep the .whl extension, but delay the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One rejected alternative would be to keep the ``.whl`` extension, but delay the
```

distribution, because the resolver will skip all newer wheels. Users are often
poorly set up to build projects from source, so this could lead to some failed
builds users would not see otherwise. There are several approaches to resolving
this issue, such as allowing dual-publishing for the initial migration, or
marking source distributions as not intended to be built.

Rejected Ideas
==============

The Wheel Format is Perfect and Does not Need to be Changed
-----------------------------------------------------------
The wheel format has been around for over 10 years, and in that time, Python
packages have changed a lot. It is much more common for packages to include
Rust or C extension modules, increasing the size of packages. Better
compression, such as lzma or zstd, could save a lot of time and bandwidth for
PyPI and its users. Compatibility tags cannot express the wide variety of
hardware used to accelerate Python code today, nor encode shared library
compatibility information. In order to address these issues, evolution of the
wheel package format is necessary.

Wheel Format Changes Should be Tied to CPython Releases
-------------------------------------------------------

> The author of this PEP does not believe that tying wheel revisions to CPython

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I do not believe that tying wheel revisions to CPython
```

releases is beneficial. The main benefit of doing so is to make adoption of new
wheels predictable - users with the latest CPython get the latest package

> format! This choice has several issues however. First, by tying the new format
> to the latest CPython, it makes adoption much slower. Users on LTS versions of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
format! This choice has several issues however. First, tying the new format
to the latest CPython makes adoption much slower. Users on LTS versions of
```

build tag in the middle of the file name makes any extensions ambiguous (i.e.
``foo-0.3-py3-none-any-fancy_new_tag.whl`` would parse as the build tag being
``py3``). This limits changes to information stored in the wheel file name.

Discussion Topics
=================

Should Indices Support Dual-publishing for the First Migration?
---------------------------------------------------------------
Since ``.whl`` and ``.whlx`` will look different in file name, they could be
uploaded side-by-side to package indices like PyPI. This has some nice
benefits, like dual-support for older and newer installers, so users who can
get the latest features, while users who don't upgrade still can install the
latest version of a package.

There are many complications however. Should we allow wheel 2 uploads to
existing wheel 1-only releases? Should we put any requirements on the
side-by-side wheels, such as:

.. admonition:: Constraints on dual-published wheels

    A given index may contain identical-content wheels with different wheel
    versions, and installers should prefer the newest-available wheel format,
    with all other factors held constant.

> Should we only allow uploading both with PEP 694 allowing "atomic"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Should we only allow uploading both with :pep:`694` allowing "atomic"
```
